Azure Pipelines blog (#431)
kedacore/keda-docs: content/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler.md

+++
title = "Autoscaling Azure Pipelines agents with KEDA"
date = 2021-04-28
author = "Troy Denorme"
+++

With the addition of Azure Piplines support in KEDA, it is now possible to autoscale your Azure Pipelines agents based on the agent pool queue length.
Self-hosted Azure Pipelines agents are the perfect workload for this scaler. By autoscaling the agents you can create a scalable CI/CD environment.

> The number of concurrent pipelines you can run is limited by your [parallel jobs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/agents#parallel-jobs). KEDA will autoscale to the maximum defined in the ScaledObject and does not limit itself to the parallel jobs count defined for the Azure DevOps organization.

## Azure Pipelines agents

Azure Pipelines jobs can run on different kinds of agents ([docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/agents)). But if you want full control, you are going to use self-hosted agents. 

> The agents can run on Linux, macOS or Windows machines but also in a container. To scale the agents with KEDA you can run self-hosted agents on Kubernetes.

Reviewer: What about this?
```suggestion
Agents are able to run on Linux, macOS or Windows machines and can be packaged in to a container.

When running self-hosted agents on Kubernetes, there is no out-of-the-box support for autoscaling. However, with KEDA v2.3 you can now autoscale your self-hosted agents on Kubernetes based on the amount of pending jobs in your agent pool.
```

You can run the agents as a `Deployment` or a `Job` in Kubernetes and scale them accordingly with a `ScaledObject` or a `ScaledJob`.

> ## Deploy a self-hosted agent on Kubernetes as a Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploying a self-hosted agent on Kubernetes as a Deployment
```

### Create the container image

> To create a basic Azure Pipelines agent image you can follow the instructions from the offical docs. [Run a self-hosted agent in Docker](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/docker#linux).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a basic Azure Pipelines agent image you can follow the instructions from [the offical docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/docker#linux).
```

### Deploy on Kubernetes

> You can deploy the agent as a Kubernetes deployment and use KEDA to autoscale the deployment.
> The following is an example manifest for the deployment:

Reviewer: Let's leave KEDA out for now since that comes later?
```suggestion
You can easily deploy the agent as a Kubernetes deployment by using this Kubernetes manifest:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: azdevops-deployment
  labels:
    app: azdevops-agent
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: azdevops-agent
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: azdevops-agent
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: azdevops-agent

>         image: <azdevops-image>

Reviewer: Do you know about a public image that can be used?

Author: I don't know about a public image, especially not an official one.

Reviewer: There definitely is not a public one but that's ok, was just checking!

        env:
          - name: AZP_URL
            valueFrom:
              secretKeyRef:
                name: azdevops

>                 key: AZP_URL

Reviewer: Might be good to add an example Secret for a full reference?

Author: I have changed the example a bit and included the secret as well.

          - name: AZP_TOKEN
            valueFrom:
              secretKeyRef:
                name: azdevops
                key: AZP_TOKEN
          - name: AZP_POOL
            valueFrom:
              secretKeyRef:
                name: azdevops
                key: AZP_POOL
        volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /var/run/docker.sock
          name: docker-volume
      volumes:
      - name: docker-volume
        hostPath:
          path: /var/run/docker.sock
```

### Autoscaling with KEDA

After the deployment is created you need to create the `ScaledObject` in order for KEDA to start scaling the deployment.

> To scale based on the queue length of an Azure Pipelines agent pool, you can use the `azure-pipelines` trigger.

Reviewer: Adding new line for readability in rendered output:
```suggestion

To scale based on the queue length of an Azure Pipelines agent pool, you can use the `azure-pipelines` trigger as of KEDA v2.3.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: keda.sh/v1alpha1
kind: TriggerAuthentication
metadata:
  name: pipeline-trigger-auth
spec:
  secretTargetRef:
    - parameter: personalAccessToken
      name: pipeline-auth

>       key: personalAccessToken

Reviewer: We might want to add this to our Secret sample above?

---
apiVersion: keda.sh/v1alpha1
kind: ScaledObject
metadata:
  name: azure-pipelines-scaledobject
spec:
  scaleTargetRef:
    name: azdevops-deployment
  minReplicaCount: 1
  maxReplicaCount: 5 
  triggers:
  - type: azure-pipelines
    metadata:
      poolID: "1"
      organizationURLFromEnv: "AZP_URL"
    authenticationRef:
     name: pipeline-trigger-auth
```

The default `targetPipelinesQueueLength` is `1`, so there will be one agent for each job.

> > The Azure Pipelines scaler supports scaling to zero but you need at least one agent registered in the agent pool in order for new jobs to be scheduled on the pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ⚠ The Azure Pipelines scaler supports scaling to zero but you need at least one agent registered in the agent pool in order for new jobs to be scheduled on the pool.
```

### Running Azure Pipelines jobs

> After deploying the agent and the KEDA ScaledObject. It is time to see the autoscaling in action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After deploying the agent and the KEDA `ScaledObject` it is time to see the autoscaling in action.
```

First, check the current pods running in the deployment:
```sh
$ kubectl get pods
NAME                                   READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
azdevops-deployment-5854bbbf84-r86qv   1/1     Running   0          75s
```

![deployment agents](/img/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler/deployment-agents.png)

Now let's queue some builds.

![azure devops builds](/img/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler/deployment-builds.png)

> ```sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, you see that KEDA starts scaling out the pods to meet the pending jobs:

```sh
```

$ kubectl get pods
NAME                                   READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
azdevops-deployment-5854bbbf84-4gfbx   1/1     Running   0          36s
azdevops-deployment-5854bbbf84-r86qv   1/1     Running   0          12m
azdevops-deployment-5854bbbf84-tm47k   1/1     Running   0          36s
```

> ![deployment agents](/img/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler/deployment-agents-autoscaled.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And they appear on Azure Pipelines as well:

![deployment agents](/img/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler/deployment-agents-autoscaled.png)
```

## Run the self-hosted agent as a Job

When running your agents as a deployment you have no control on which pod gets killed when scaling down. ([see KEDA docs](https://keda.sh/docs/1.4/concepts/scaling-deployments/#long-running-executions))

If you run your agents as a `Job`, KEDA will start a Kubernetes job for each job that is in the agent pool queue. The agents will accept one job when they are started and terminate afterwards.

> You also achieve fully isolated build environments when using jobs, since an agent is always created for each job.

Reviewer: How about this?

```suggestion
Since an agent is always created for every pipeline job, you can achieve fully isolated build environments by using Kubernetes jobs.
```

The following manifest is an example of a `ScaledJob` combined with the Azure Pipelines agent.
You have to use a modified image for this where the agent terminates itself after running a job. ([docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/v2-linux#run-once))

```yaml
apiVersion: keda.sh/v1alpha1
kind: ScaledJob
metadata:
  name: azdevops-scaledjob
spec:
  jobTargetRef:
    template:
      spec:
        containers:
        - name: azdevops-agent-job

>           image: <azdevops-image>

Reviewer: Same here, do we have a public sample or not?

Reviewer: There definitely is not a public one but that's ok, was just checking!

          imagePullPolicy: Always
          env:
          - name: AZP_URL
            value: "<organizationUrl>"
          - name: AZP_TOKEN
            value: "<token>"
          - name: AZP_POOL
            value: "<agentpool>"
          volumeMounts:
          - mountPath: /var/run/docker.sock
            name: docker-volume
        volumes:
        - name: docker-volume
          hostPath:
            path: /var/run/docker.sock
  pollingInterval: 30
  successfulJobsHistoryLimit: 5
  failedJobsHistoryLimit: 5
  maxReplicaCount: 10   
  scalingStrategy:
    strategy: "default"               
  triggers:
  - type: azure-pipelines
    metadata:
      poolID: "1"
      organizationURLFromEnv: "AZP_URL"
      personalAccessTokenFromEnv: "AZP_TOKEN"
```

### Placeholder agent

You cannot queue an Azure Pipelines job on an empty agent pool because Azure Pipelines cannot validate if the pool matches the requirements for the job.

> When you try to do this you will encounter the following error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

When you try to do this you will encounter the following error:
```

> ##[error]No agent found in pool keda-demo which satisfies the specified demands: Agent.Version -gtVersion 2.163.1

> You can however use a workaround to register an agent as a placeholder, you are able to queue jobs on an agent pool with no online agents.

Reviewer: Does this make sense?

```suggestion
You can, however, use a workaround to register an agent as a placeholder which allows you to queue jobs on an agent pool that has no agents that are online.

```

Make sure you don't execute any cleanup code in your container to unregister the agent when removing it to keep the placeholder agent registerd in the agent pool.

> ### ScaledJobs in action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Seeing `ScaledJobs` in action
```

> To be able to fully create agent on-demand, a template agent was created as a placeholder to be able to queue jobs.

Reviewer: Might be good to clarify how you have achieved this? A separate deployment or a misconfigured agent?

Reviewer: No it is ok, thanks!

![placeholder agent](/img/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler/placeholder-agent.png)

> Jobs are queued:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's queue some pipelines:
```

![azure devops builds](/img/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler/jobs-builds.png)

KEDA will create a Kubernetes job for each pending job in the queue for the specified agent pool.

```sh
$ kubectl get pods
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
azdevops-scaledjob-2hshf-mp5jl   1/1     Running   0          24s
azdevops-scaledjob-5gzr5-p8625   1/1     Running   0          24s
azdevops-scaledjob-mmlzc-rw5gm   1/1     Running   0          24s
```

> ![scaledjobs agents](/img/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler/jobs-agents-autoscaled.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once that happens, you will see the jobs in the Azure Pipelines' agent pool:

![scaledjobs agents](/img/blog/azure-pipelines-scaler/jobs-agents-autoscaled.png)
```
